Add TIP-1080 vault-backed TIP-20 tokens (#5520)
tempoxyz/tempo: tips/tip-1080.md

authors: Dan Robinson (@danrobinson)
status: Draft
related: TIP-20, TIP-403
protocolVersion: TBD
---

# TIP-1080: Vault-Backed TIP-20 Tokens

## Abstract

This TIP adds a `createVaultToken` function to the TIP-20 factory. A vault-backed TIP-20 is a normal transferable TIP-20 token whose balances represent pro-rata claims on an immutable external vault that exposes the ERC-4626 asset, accounting, deposit, and withdrawal interface.

The wrapped vault remains responsible for all yield, reward, donation, fee, limit, and risk logic. The vault-backed TIP-20 only exposes a TIP-20 transfer surface plus an ERC-4626-like deposit and withdrawal surface that mints or burns TIP-20 balances and moves assets through the configured vault.

## Motivation

TIP-20 tokens are the native token surface for Tempo wallets, policy checks, indexing, and payment flows. ERC-4626 vaults are the standard surface for tokenized vault deposits and redemptions. Some integrations need both properties at once: users should hold and transfer a native TIP-20 balance, while that balance should also represent a claim on assets managed by a vault.

> This can be done without requiring the vault to become a TIP-20 token. Instead, the TIP-20 can act as the vault's aggregate depositor. From the vault's perspective, the TIP-20 token contract is an ordinary holder. From the user's perspective, TIP-20 balances are transferable vault claims, and deposit or withdrawal uses an ERC-4626-like interface on the TIP-20 token.

Reviewer: Can add a paragraph here to say that the vault can either be an existing vault, or a custom smart contract that just exposes a partial vault-like interface to only the TIP-20 (and can thus skip tracking balances internally).

This keeps responsibilities separated:

- TIP-20 handles transfers, allowances, metadata, factory registration, and TIP-403 policy enforcement.
- The vault handles share-price growth, rewards, donations, allocation, fees, limits, and withdrawal mechanics.
- The factory binds the TIP-20 to a fixed vault and a fixed TIP-403 policy at creation time.

## Assumptions

- The wrapped vault exposes ERC-4626-compatible `asset`, accounting, deposit, and withdrawal functions. The vault MAY also expose ERC-20 share functions, but the vault-backed TIP-20 MUST NOT rely on vault share transferability.

> - The wrapped vault's `asset()` return value is immutable for the lifetime of the vault-backed TIP-20.

Reviewer: Just say "is immutable."

- **TIP-403 policy:** controls TIP-20 transfer authorization. The policy is immutable for the vault-backed TIP-20.
- **Factory:** trusted to bind each vault-backed TIP-20 to the intended immutable vault and policy during creation.

---

# Specification

## Factory Interface

The TIP-20 factory is extended with:

```solidity
/// @notice Creates a TIP-20 token whose balances are backed by an external
///         ERC-4626-compatible vault.
/// @param name The TIP-20 name.
/// @param symbol The TIP-20 symbol.
/// @param currency The ISO or issuer-defined currency string.
/// @param quoteToken The quote token used by existing TIP-20 factory rules.
/// @param policyId The immutable TIP-403 policy ID for this token.
/// @param vault The immutable external vault backing this token.
/// @param salt The deterministic address salt.
/// @return token The created vault-backed TIP-20 token address.
function createVaultToken(
    string memory name,
    string memory symbol,
    string memory currency,
    address quoteToken,
    uint64 policyId,
    address vault,
    bytes32 salt
) external returns (address token);
```

`createVaultToken` MUST:

1. Validate `vault != address(0)`.

> 2. Validate that `vault.asset()` returns a nonzero address.

Reviewer: Should we require that `vault.asset()` is a TIP-20?

3. Validate `policyId` using the same TIP-403 policy existence rules that apply to ordinary TIP-20 token policy configuration.

> 4. Deploy or initialize a TIP-20 token whose `vault` and `policyId` are immutable.

Reviewer: What does "Deploy or initialize" mean here? Just deploy I think

5. Register the created token as a TIP-20 token, so `isTIP20(token) == true`.

> 6. Emit `VaultTokenCreated`.

Reviewer: Let's emit both events

function maxWithdraw(address owner) external view returns (uint256);
function maxRedeem(address owner) external view returns (uint256);
function previewDeposit(uint256 assets) external view returns (uint256);
function previewMint(uint256 shares) external view returns (uint256);
function previewWithdraw(uint256 assets) external view returns (uint256);
function previewRedeem(uint256 shares) external view returns (uint256);
function deposit(uint256 assets, address receiver) external returns (uint256 shares);
function mint(uint256 shares, address receiver) external returns (uint256 assets);
function withdraw(uint256 assets, address receiver, address owner) external returns (uint256 shares);
function redeem(uint256 shares, address receiver, address owner) external returns (uint256 assets);
```

The wrapped vault MAY omit ERC-20 functions such as `balanceOf`, `transfer`, `transferFrom`, and `allowance`. The vault-backed TIP-20 MUST track the amount of vault shares attributable to the TIP-20 contract through the shares returned by vault deposit, mint, withdraw, and redeem calls, rather than by assuming ERC-20 share-balance reads are available.

## Vault-Backed TIP-20 Interface

> A vault-backed TIP-20 MUST expose all ordinary TIP-20 behavior and the following ERC-4626-like methods:

Reviewer: It shouldn't expose all ordinary TIP-20 behavior, right? I think it shouldn't expose mint and burn.

function maxWithdraw(address owner) external view returns (uint256);
function maxRedeem(address owner) external view returns (uint256);
function previewDeposit(uint256 assets) external view returns (uint256);
function previewMint(uint256 shares) external view returns (uint256);
function previewWithdraw(uint256 assets) external view returns (uint256);
function previewRedeem(uint256 shares) external view returns (uint256);
function deposit(uint256 assets, address receiver) external returns (uint256 shares);
function mint(uint256 shares, address receiver) external returns (uint256 assets);
function withdraw(uint256 assets, address receiver, address owner) external returns (uint256 shares);
function redeem(uint256 shares, address receiver, address owner) external returns (uint256 assets);
```

In this interface, "shares" means vault-backed TIP-20 units. A user's TIP-20 balance is their share balance. Transferring TIP-20 balances transfers the corresponding pro-rata vault claim without interacting with the wrapped vault.

## Accounting Model

The vault-backed TIP-20 stores:

```solidity
address immutable vault;
address immutable asset;
uint64 immutable policyId;

> uint256 accountedVaultShares;

Reviewer: Let's remove this and just use `totalSupply`

authors: Dan Robinson (@danrobinson)
status: Draft
related: TIP-20, TIP-403
protocolVersion: TBD
---

# TIP-1080: Vault-Backed TIP-20 Tokens

## Abstract

This TIP adds a `createVaultToken` function to the TIP-20 factory. A vault-backed TIP-20 is a normal transferable TIP-20 token whose balances represent pro-rata claims on an immutable external vault that exposes the ERC-4626 asset, accounting, deposit, and withdrawal interface.

The wrapped vault remains responsible for all yield, reward, donation, fee, limit, and risk logic. The vault-backed TIP-20 only exposes a TIP-20 transfer surface plus an ERC-4626-like deposit and withdrawal surface that mints or burns TIP-20 balances and moves assets through the configured vault.

## Motivation

TIP-20 tokens are the native token surface for Tempo wallets, policy checks, indexing, and payment flows. ERC-4626 vaults are the standard surface for tokenized vault deposits and redemptions. Some integrations need both properties at once: users should hold and transfer a native TIP-20 balance, while that balance should also represent a claim on assets managed by a vault.

> This can be done without requiring the vault to become a TIP-20 token. Instead, the TIP-20 can act as the vault's aggregate depositor. From the vault's perspective, the TIP-20 token contract is an ordinary holder. From the user's perspective, TIP-20 balances are transferable vault claims, and deposit or withdrawal uses an ERC-4626-like interface on the TIP-20 token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be done without requiring the vault to become a TIP-20 token. Instead, the TIP-20 can act as one aggregated depositor on the vault. From the vault's perspective, the TIP-20 token contract is an ordinary holder. From the user's perspective, TIP-20 balances are transferable vault claims, and deposit or withdrawal uses an ERC-4626-like interface on the TIP-20 token.
```

- **Vault operator or vault logic:** trusted to account for deposits, withdrawals, share-price growth, rewards, fees, and limits correctly. A malicious or buggy vault can reduce or block the value represented by the vault-backed TIP-20.
- **TIP-20 holder:** may transfer balances, approve allowances, deposit assets, and withdraw assets subject to TIP-20 policy and vault behavior.
- **External depositor into the vault:** may deposit directly into the wrapped vault if the vault permits it. This can affect the vault's global share price but MUST NOT corrupt the vault-backed TIP-20's pro-rata accounting.
- **Wrapped vault depositor checks:** apply to the vault-backed TIP-20 contract as the vault depositor. Per-end-holder limits or allowlists can be implemented by the optional hook contract, but the wrapped vault itself only sees the vault-backed TIP-20 contract.
- **Hook contract:** optionally trusted to enforce additional per-user deposit or mint limits. A malicious or buggy hook can block otherwise valid deposits or mints, or return incorrect max values.
- **TIP-403 policy:** controls TIP-20 transfer authorization. The current policy can be updated by `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE`.

> - **Admin roles:** trusted to update the TIP-403 policy and pause or unpause vault-backed TIP-20 operations.

Reviewer: Should this have a PAUSER_ROLE or something? Do whatever TIP-20 does

- **Factory:** trusted to bind each vault-backed TIP-20 to the intended immutable vault and initial policy during creation.

---

# Specification

## Factory Interface

The TIP-20 factory is extended with:

```solidity
/// @notice Creates a TIP-20 token whose balances are backed by an external
///         ERC-4626-compatible vault.
/// @param name The TIP-20 name.
/// @param symbol The TIP-20 symbol.
/// @param currency The ISO or issuer-defined currency string.
/// @param quoteToken The quote token used by existing TIP-20 factory rules.
/// @param admin The initial holder of DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE.
/// @param policyId The initial TIP-403 policy ID for this token.
/// @param vault The immutable external vault backing this token.
/// @param salt The deterministic address salt.
/// @return token The created vault-backed TIP-20 token address.
function createVaultToken(
    string memory name,
    string memory symbol,
    string memory currency,
    address quoteToken,
    address admin,
    uint64 policyId,
    address vault,
    bytes32 salt
) external returns (address token);
```

`createVaultToken` MUST:

1. Validate `vault != address(0)`.
2. Validate `admin != address(0)`.

> 3. Validate that `vault.asset()` returns a nonzero TIP-20 token address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Validate that `vault.asset()` returns a TIP-20 token address.
```

4. Validate `policyId` using the same TIP-403 policy existence rules that apply to ordinary TIP-20 token policy configuration.
5. Deploy a TIP-20 token whose `vault` is immutable, whose initial `policyId` is `policyId`, and whose initial `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` holder is `admin`.
6. Register the created token as a TIP-20 token, so `isTIP20(token) == true`.
7. Emit `VaultTokenCreated` and the existing `TokenCreated` event.

```solidity
event VaultTokenCreated(
    address indexed token,
    address indexed vault,
    uint64 indexed policyId,
    string name,
    string symbol,
    string currency,
    address quoteToken,
    address admin,
    bytes32 salt
);
```

> The factory MUST also emit the existing `TokenCreated` event for compatibility with indexers that already consume TIP-20 factory events.

Reviewer: State that the factory emits this event, and then emits the standard `TokenCreated` event.

Reviewer: Sorry, flip the order—standard TokenCreated event, then this event.

## Accounting Model

The vault-backed TIP-20 stores:

```solidity
address immutable vault;
address immutable asset;
uint64 policyId;
address hook;
```

TIP-20 `totalSupply()` is the total number of wrapped-vault shares attributable to all outstanding TIP-20 balances.

TIP-20 `totalSupply()` MUST equal the sum of all holder balances after every successful external call.

`totalAssets()` MUST return `vault.convertToAssets(totalSupply())`.

`convertToAssets(shares)` MUST return `vault.convertToAssets(shares)`.

`convertToShares(assets)` MUST return `vault.convertToShares(assets)`.

`maxDeposit(receiver)` MUST return `0` if the vault-backed TIP-20 is paused or if minting TIP-20 shares to `receiver` would fail the current TIP-403 policy. Otherwise, it MUST return the smaller of `vault.maxDeposit(address(this))` and the current hook's `maxDeposit` value for `msg.sender` and `receiver`. If no hook is configured, the hook limit is treated as `type(uint256).max`.

> `maxMint(receiver)` MUST return `0` if the vault-backed TIP-20 is paused or if minting TIP-20 shares to `receiver` would fail the current TIP-403 policy. Otherwise, it MUST return the smaller of `vault.maxMint(address(this))` and the current hook's `maxMint` value for `msg.sender` and `receiver`. If no hook is configured, the hook limit is treated as `type(uint256).max`.

Reviewer: Default limit should be `type(uint128).max`

The vault can be an existing ERC-4626 vault, or it can be a custom vault-like contract that exposes the required ERC-4626-compatible interface only to the vault-backed TIP-20. A custom vault-like contract used only through one vault-backed TIP-20 can keep its own accounting simpler than a general-purpose ERC-4626 vault, because the vault-backed TIP-20 tracks end-holder balances and the vault only needs to account for the aggregate wrapper position.

This keeps responsibilities separated:

- TIP-20 handles transfers, allowances, metadata, factory registration, and TIP-403 policy enforcement.
- The vault handles share-price growth, rewards, donations, allocation, fees, limits, and withdrawal mechanics.
- The factory binds the TIP-20 to a fixed vault and an initial TIP-403 transfer policy at creation time.

## Assumptions

- The wrapped vault exposes ERC-4626-compatible `asset`, accounting, deposit, and withdrawal functions. The vault MAY also expose ERC-20 share functions, but the vault-backed TIP-20 MUST NOT rely on vault share transferability.

> - The wrapped vault's `asset()` return value is immutable.

Reviewer: Make this "MUST be immutable". Also state what happens if this assumption is violated. I think what happens is that the TIP-20 starts returning a different value for asset() and would start returning that asset when unwrapped.

## Vault-Backed TIP-20 Interface

A vault-backed TIP-20 MUST expose ordinary TIP-20 transfer, approval, metadata, factory-registration, and policy behavior, plus the vault-specific functions below. The only ways to mint or burn vault-backed TIP-20 balances are the ERC-4626-like `deposit`, `mint`, `withdraw`, and `redeem` methods below.

For clarity, a vault-backed TIP-20 MUST support the following ordinary TIP-20 functions with ordinary TIP-20 semantics, except where this TIP states otherwise:

- Metadata and supply reads: `name`, `symbol`, `decimals`, `currency`, `quoteToken`, `logoURI`, `totalSupply`, and `balanceOf`.
- Transfers and approvals: `transfer`, `transferWithMemo`, `approve`, `allowance`, `transferFrom`, `transferFromWithMemo`, `permit`, `nonces`, and `DOMAIN_SEPARATOR`.
- Transfer-policy, pause, logo, and role administration: `transferPolicyId`, `changeTransferPolicyId`, `paused`, `pause`, `unpause`, `setLogoURI`, `PAUSE_ROLE`, `UNPAUSE_ROLE`, and ordinary role-management functions.

> A vault-backed TIP-20 MUST NOT support ordinary TIP-20 standalone issuance or direct burn entrypoints that bypass the vault. Calls to ordinary TIP-20 `mint(address,uint256)`, `mintWithMemo`, `burn`, and `burnWithMemo` MUST revert. Minting and burning vault-backed TIP-20 balances remains available only through the ERC-4626-like `deposit`, `mint(uint256,address)`, `withdraw`, and `redeem` functions, which keep TIP-20 supply synchronized with the wrapped vault share balance. Vault or vault hook limits are represented through the ERC-4626-like `maxDeposit` and `maxMint` functions.

Reviewer 2: add burnBlocked here?

The additional vault-backed interface is:

```solidity
function asset() external view returns (address);
function vault() external view returns (address);
function transferPolicyId() external view returns (uint64);

> function hook() external view returns (address);

Reviewer: Can we make this `vaultHook`?

```solidity
event PauseStateUpdate(address indexed updater, bool isPaused);
```

## Hook Contract

A vault-backed TIP-20 MAY have an optional hook contract. The hook is not part of the wrapped vault. It is called by the vault-backed TIP-20 before deposits and mints, and by `maxDeposit` and `maxMint` to compute additional end-holder-specific limits.

The hook interface is:

```solidity
interface IVaultTokenHook {
    function maxDeposit(
        address caller,
        address receiver,
        uint256 vaultMaxAssets
    ) external view returns (uint256 maxAssets);

    function maxMint(
        address caller,
        address receiver,
        uint256 vaultMaxShares
    ) external view returns (uint256 maxShares);

    function beforeDeposit(
        address caller,
        address receiver,
        uint256 assets,
        uint256 previewShares
    ) external view;

    function beforeMint(
        address caller,
        address receiver,
        uint256 shares,
        uint256 assets
    ) external view;
}
```

`DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` MAY set the hook to any address or to `address(0)` to disable hooks. Hook updates MUST emit:

```solidity

> event HookUpdated(address indexed oldHook, address indexed newHook);

Reviewer: Can we make this `HookUpdate` to match `TransferPolicyUpdate`
